# Aphantasia

As long as I can remember it is usually pretty rare for me to dream - or rather, it is pretty rare for me to remember any of my dreams.  The dreams that I do remember are more like stories because I do not "see" anything when I am dreaming - my dreams are like someone is narrating a story in my mind.  The stories that happen in my dreams feel very real to me - much like someone telling a spooky story can make people feel dread and fear, or a good narrator reading a book can make you feel like you are a part of the book.  Up until I was around 35 years old I never realized that other people can experience dreams visually - until I read this [article written by the co-founder of the Firefox web browser](https://www.facebook.com/notes/blake-ross/aphantasia-how-it-feels-to-be-blind-in-your-mind/10156834777480504/)

Much of the article rang true to me - especially the fact that I never once considered that people could actually visualize things in their minds.  If someone asks me what my wife looks like, I need to rely on facts that I have memorized about her appearance - I cannot conjure up a picture of her in my mind and relay what I am "seeing".  If someone asks me to describe the building where I work, I would need to recall facts about my office building and share those facts.  It always amazed me when my wife could rattle off the eye-colors of everyone we know, which I now know is because she can "see" them in her mind and tell me the color of their eyes based on what she is "seeing".  For me, unless I commit the color of someone's eyesight to memory, much like memorizing their phone number, I will never be able to tell you the color of their eyes.

One interesting aspect to me is that I am fully able to recognize people, so I know my brain must have some kind of visual memory - I just am not able to access that visual memory.

Aphantasia is not really an official name for a disorder - there has not been much research on the topic.  Aphantasia is basically the condition where people are unable to visualize things in their minds - it is the absence of fantasy - aphantasia.

Reading the article by Blake Ross made me realize that as long as I can remember, I have never been able to visualize anything in my mind.  It also clicked for me why my dreams never seemed to be like other people's dreams.  In the past, when people used to tell me to picture an object, I never realized they were assuming I could actually picture it - because I always assumed they were like me, and picturing something was "code" for recalling the facts about it.

Another difference I learned was the way my wife spells words compared to how I spell words.  She says that when she spells a word she pictures the word in her mind, like she is looking at a dictionary, and just "reads" the letters that she sees.  I have to rely on my memory - my memory of all of the rules ("I before E except after C" for example) or simply memorize the order of the letters that make up a word - much like multiplication tables.  Most people have memorized their multiplication tables - I have also memorized the letters of many words.

It also became clear to me why I have such a hard time remembering the name of someone I just met as well as what they look like.  I am introverted, so being in a situation with unfamiliar people already has my brain working full time  When I meet someone new it is hard for me to memorize facts about them as well as make sure I am not being socially awkward.  I could meet someone, have a 5-minute conversation with them, turn around to go somewhere else and within 2 seconds not be able to tell you what color their hair or eyes were, what their name was, or very little of what we talked about.  Since my brain is diverting a lot of its effort to the social setting, it becomes very difficult for me to catalog the facts about people.  On that note, if the social setting is more relaxed and I meet someone new, my mind is dividing work on having a conversation with them, but also memorizing facts about them.  I have a better chance of remembering their name or characteristics about them if I am more relaxed.  Another interesting setting for me is people-watching.  If I have nothing to do, just sitting on a bench watching people walk by, I could tell you all about the people that walked by me for the past 15 minutes: hair colors, clothing, family members, etc.  I think this is because my brain isn't multitasking with other social tasks - it is purely focused on observing and cataloging facts.

Nothing about this seems weird to me - the strangest thing about aphantasia is that people can actually visualize things in their minds - I have no concept of what that would feel like.
